# First Lecture 06-09-2019

## Info

- Gurinov, A. Assistant Professor with 20 years of experience in database development
- learn about basic concepts of databases
- one semester now, used to be two, used to have principles and design, now only one
- we now have a more intense version
- first half will be focused on working with data, like queries to databases
- show how data can be sorted and turned into information
- we shall get used to the tools we use
- second half will be on design: how to design tables, separate or combine them etc.
- maybe add some modern stuff if there is enough time
- there will be a syllabus for the course over the weekend
- our model will be auca.kg/e-course for learning
- Relational Databases:
  - stores data in tables
  - it is not a graph, .json, 
  - what means organized? Structured
  - every table is a reflection of an object from the real or imaginary world
  - attributes are put into columns
  - we need to define boundaries of attributes, how should the data be stored as data
    types
- data about data is called metadata

## Environment

- Microsoft SQL Server Management Studio - SSMS
- we can use whatever, but he will not support anything but MS SQL Studio
- Language: SQL

## Notes

- What is data?
  - anything that can be stored
  - information?
  - info about and object
  - info that can be analysed and accessed
- What is the difference between data and information?
  - data is information that is used
  - information that is stored and can be accessed
  - data is always stored somewhere
  - anything that can be analysed is data?
  - data is organized information
  - Data: its raining today. -> Information: it will rain today at 10pm
  - __data is raw, information is organized data, it has more context__
  - information is used to solve some problems
  - data can be interpreted and used for different kinds of uses
- What is the difference between information and knowledge?
  - subset of information?
  - knowledge is from the past, but info is from the present?
  - knowledge has some use, information maybe not?
    - does not seem like is makes sense?
  - knowledge can not be false but information cannot?
  - __knowledge is something that is generalized__
  - something that is learned
- What is the difference between knowledge and wisdom?
  - experience is needed to make wisdom out of knowledge?
  - when we know how to use knowledge correctly
  - applied knowledge
  - make correct use of knowledge
- What is a database?
  - collection of data stored somewhere
  - is a notebook a database?
  - it needs to be organized/sorted?
  - __database is a set of organized data that is collects and stores somewhere__
  - there are many different definitions of databases
  - organized, stored electronically, makes sense in some sense, it can be edited,
    retrieved, stored, aggregated...
- some stuff about data types, bit, int, datetime, nvarchar (unicode string),
  numeric(2, 2) (float with two before and after the point), varbinary (just bin data)
- some things are strings, sometimes to guarantee data integrity, one can use something
  like enums or stuff, so strings are a threat to integrity
- every entry has to be uniquely indentifyable, by a number in the table
- everything just gets an id field which is a number
- primary key: the unique identifier of a table
- foreign key: it is a link between two tables, but it also restricts the possible input
  to the list of foreign keys, also info whose id is used in other tables can not be
  deleted from its home table -> integrity
- Data integrity: making sure that the data is not corrupted and is actually usable, be
  as strict as possible to leave no room for error

