# Description of Samarkand

Now therefore that I have narrated in detail all that befell us during our 
stay in Samarqand, I must describe that city for you, telling of all that is 
there to be seen in and round and about, and of all that Timur has 
accomplished there to embellish his capital. Samarqand stands in a plain, and 
is surrounded by a rampart or wall of earth, with a very deep ditch. The city 
itself is rather larger than Seville, but lying outside Samarqand are great 
numbers of houses which form extensive suburbs. These lie spread on all hands 
for indeed the township is surrounded by orchards and vineyards, extending in 
some cases to a league and a half or even two leagues beyond Samarqand which 
stands in their centre. In between these orchards pass streets with open 
squares; these all are densely populated, and here all kinds of goods are on 
sale with bread stuffs and meat. Thus it is that the population without the 
city is more numerous than the population within the walls. Among these 
orchards outside Samarqand are found the most noble and beautiful houses, and 
here Timur has his many palaces and pleasure grounds. Round and about the 
great men of the government also here have their estates and country houses, 
each standing within its orchard: and so numerous are these gardens and 
vineyards surrounding Samarqand that a traveller who approaches the city sees 
only a great mountainous height of trees and the houses embowered among them 
remain invisible. Through the streets of Samarqand, as through its gardens 
outside and inside, pass many water-conduits, and in these gardens are the 
melon-beds and cotton-growing lands.

The melons of this countryside are abundant and very good, and at the season 
of Christmas there are so many melons and grapes to be had that it is indeed 
marvellous. Every day camels bring in their loads of melons from the country 
and it is a wonder how many are sold and eaten in the market. At all the 
outlying villages the melons being so abundant, at one season the people cure 
them, drying the same as is done with figs, which thus can be kept for use 
from one year's end to the next. The melons are cured after this fashion. They 
slice the fruit up into great pieces, removing the rind, when they are put to 
shrivel in the sun. As soon as these pieces are quite dry, they bind them one 
with the other storing them in hampers and thus they keep good for a whole 
twelvemonth. Beyond the suburbs of Samarqand stretch the great plains where 
are situated many hamlets these being all well populated, for here the 
immigrantfolk are settled whom Timur has caused to be brought hither from all 
the foreign lands that he has conquered. The soil of the whole province of 
Samarqand is most fertile producing great crops of wheat. There are abundant 
fruit-trees also with rich vineyards: the livestock is magnificent, beasts and 
poultry all of a fine breed. The sheep are famous for having those fat tails 
that weigh each some twenty pounds, in fact as much as a man can readily hold 
in the hand: and of these sheep the flocks are so abundant that even when 
Timur is in camp here with his armies, [and there is a scarcity] a couple of 
sheep can be had in the market for the price of a ducat [which is about six 
shillings]. The prices indeed are so low that for a Men, which is a coin worth 
[about three pence] or half a real, you may have a bushel and a half of barley. 
Baked bread is everywhere plentiful and rice can be had cheap in any quantity.

The richness and abundance of this great capital and its district is such as 
is indeed a wonder to behold: and it is for this reason that it bears the 
name of Samarqand: for this name would be more exactly written Semiz-kent, two 
words which signify "Rich-Town," for Semiz [in Turkish] is fat or rich and 
Kent means city or township: in time these two words having been corrupted 
into the name Samarqand. Further this land of Samarqand is not alone rich in 
food stuffs but also in manufactures, such as factories of silk both the kinds 
called Zaytumi and Kincobs, also crapes, taffetas and the stuffs we call 
Tercenals in Spain, which are all produced here in great numbers. Further they 
make up special fur linings for silk garments, and manufacture stuffs in gold 
and blue with other colours of diverse tints dyed, and besides all these kinds 
of stuffs there are the spiceries. Thus trade has always been fostered by 
Timur with the view of making his capital the noblest of cities: and during 
all his conquests wheresoever he came he carried off the best men of the 
population to people Samarqand, bringing thither together the master-craftsmen 
of all nations. Thus from Damascus he carried away with him all the weavers of 
that city, those who worked at the silk looms. Further the bow-makers who 
produce those cross-bows which are so famous: likewise armourers: also the 
craftsmen in glass and porcelain, who are known to be the best in all the 
world. From Turkey he had brought their gun-smiths who make the arquebus, and 
all men of other crafts wheresoever he found them, such as the silver-smiths 
and the masons. These all were in very great numbers, indeed so many had been 
brought together of craftsmen of all sorts that of every denomination and kind 
you might find many master-workmen established in the capital. Again he had 
gathered to settle here in Samarqand artillery men, both engineers and 
bombardiers, besides those who make the ropes by which these engines work. 
Lastly hemp and flax had been sown and grown for the purpose in the Samarqand 
lands, where never before this crop had been cultivated.

So great therefore was the population now of all nationalities gathered 
together in Samarqand that of men with their families the number they said 
must amount to 150,000 souls. Of the nations brought here together there were 
to be seen Turks, Arabs and Moors of diverse sects, with Christians who were 
Greeks and Armenians, Catholics, Jacobites and Nestorians, besides those 
[Indian] folk who baptize with fire in the forehead, who are indeed Christians 
but of a faith that is peculiar to their nation. The population of Samarqand 
was so vast that lodging for them all could not be found in the city limits, 
nor in the streets and open spaces of the suburbs and villages outside, 
and hence they were to be found quartered temporarily for lodgment even in the 
caves and in tents under the trees of the gardens, which was a matter very 
wonderful to see. The markets of Samarqand further are amply stored with 
merchandise imported from distant and foreign countries. From Russia and 
Tartary come leathers and linens, from Cathay silk stuffs that are the finest 
in the whole world, and of these the best are those that are plain without 
embroideries. Thence too is brought musk which is found in no other land but 
Cathay, with balas rubies and diamonds which are more frequently to be met 
with in those parts than elsewhere, also pearls, lastly rhubarb with many 
other spiceries. The goods that are imported to Samarqand from Cathay indeed 
are of the richest and most precious of all those brought thither from foreign 
parts, for the craftsmen of Cathay are reputed to be the most skilful by far 
beyond those of any other nation; and the saying is that they alone have two 
eyes, that the Franks indeed may have one, while the Moslems are but a blind 
folk. Thus the Franks and the Chinese in what they make have in the matter of 
eyes the advantage over the people of all other nationalities.

From India there are brought to Samarqand the lesser spiceries, which indeed 
are the most costly of the kind, such as nutmegs and cloves and mace with 
cinnamon both in the flower and as bark, with ginger and manna: all these with 
many other kinds that are never to be found in the markets of Alexandria. 
Throughout the city of Samarqand there are open squares where butchers' meat 
ready cooked, roasted or in stews, is sold, with fowls and game suitably 
prepared for eating, also bread and excellent fruit both are on sale. All 
these viands and victuals are there set out in a decent cleanly manner, namely 
in all those squares and open spaces of the town, and their traffic goes on 
all day and even all through the night time. Butchers' shops are numerous 
also those booths where fowls, pheasants and partridges are on sale: and 
these shops are kept open by night as by day. On the one part of Samarqand 
stands the Castle which is not built on a height, but is protected by deep 
ravines on all its sides: and through these water flows which makes the 
position of the Castle impregnable. It is here that his Highness keeps his 
treasure, and none from the city without may enter save the governor of the 
Castle and his men. Within its walls however Timur holds in durance and 
captivity upwards of a thousand workmen; these labour at making plate-armour 
and helms, with bows and arrows, and to this business they are kept at work 
throughout the whole of their time in the service of his Highness.

Some [seven] years gone by, when Timur last left Samarqand and set forth on 
that campaign whereby he conquered Turkey and plundered Damascus, he gave 
orders that all the troops who should accompany him might carry along on the 
march their wives and children, unless indeed by preference any man might wish 
to leave his household behind at home, in which case he should do so. This 
order Timur had given because it was then of his intention to remain abroad 
from his capital for seven whole years, while he should conquer all his 
enemies: and he had sworn an oath that he would not re-enter this castle of 
his in Samarqand until that period of seven years had run out.

# Relations with China

At that time when we were his guests in Samarqand there had arrived certain 
ambassadors sent by the Emperor of China who came to Timur bearing this 
message, namely: that all men knew that he, Timur, was in occupation of lands 
formerly held in fief to China, and hence that tribute for the same yearly had 
been due from him to the Chinese Emperor: but seeing that for seven years past 
no tribute had ever been paid, he Timur must now forthwith pay down the sum. 
The answer of his Highness to these ambassadors was that this was most true, 
and that he was about to pay what was due: but that he would not burden them, 
the ambassadors, to take it back to China on their return, for he himself 
Timur would bring it. This of course was all said in scorn and to despite 
them, for his Highness had no intention to pay that tribute. Of course during 
all those seven years past, none had ever been sent, nor had he who was at 
this time the Emperor of China ever sent any demand for it during those years; 
this absence of demand being caused by certain events now to be explained that 
of late had been happening in China.

At the beginning of that period the reigning Emperor of China had died, and he 
had left three sons among whom his Empire and lands had been divided according 
to his will. The eldest son not unnaturally had wished to take to himself the 
whole empire putting out his two brothers, and he had forthwith compassed the 
death of the younger of the two, but the other brother had fought with him and 
succeeded finally in completely overcoming him. Then this eldest one, seeing 
that as matters now stood he could not come to terms with his brother, 
despaired and putting fire to his camp had perished, he and most of his men in 
the flames. Thus the one brother who survived was now Emperor, and when the 
tumult had quieted down and order was restored this new Emperor it was who had 
sent his ambassadors to Timur demanding that tribute which, he asserted, had 
been paid in the days of his father. We heard presently that his Highness had 
issued orders that those Chinese ambassadors should forthwith all of them be 
hung, but whether this order was actually carried out or whether the Emperor 
of China finally compassed to safeguard his honour is not known to us. Now 
from the city of Samarqand it is six months' march to the capital of China, 
which is called Cambaluc, and this is the largest town in that empire: and of 
this six months' journey two are passed going across a desert country entirely 
uninhabited, except by nomad herdsmen who wander over the plains feeding their 
flocks. During the month of June of this year, immediately before the date of 
our coming to Samarqand, there had arrived a caravan of eight hundred camels 
bringing merchandise from China. Then it was that Timur having come home from 
his western campaigns had received that Chinese Embassy bearing the message 
sent him by the Emperor of China: and he forthwith had ordered the whole of 
this caravan, men and goods, to be taken into custody and that none should 
return to China.

Next from certain of the men who had travelled from Cambaluc with those 
ambassadors, as from those who had come in charge of the caravan of camels, he 
proceeded to obtain exact information concerning the many strange 
peculiarities regarding the country over which that. Emperor was lord, with 
details of the great wealth and number of the Chinese people. There was in 
particular one [Tartar merchant] who had been allowed to reside in Cambaluc 
during six whole months. He described that great city as lying not far from 
the sea coast, and for its size he said it was certainly twenty times larger 
than Tabriz. If so it must indeed be the greatest city in all the world, for 
Tabriz measures a great league and more across and therefore this city of 
Cambaluc must extend to twenty leagues from one side to the other. The man 
further reported that the Emperor of China was lord of so many warriors that 
when his host went forth to wage war beyond the limits of his Empire, without 
counting those who marched with him he could leave 400,000 horsemen behind to 
guard his realm together with numerous regiments of footguards. As that man 
further reported it was the order current in China that no nobleman should be 
allowed to appear publicly on horseback unless he kept in his service at his 
call at least a thousand horsemen; and yet of the like of such nobles the 
number to be met with was very large. Many were the other wonderful facts that 
were further related of the capital and country of China. Lastly it was told 
us that this new Emperor of China had by birth been an idolater, but lately 
had been converted to the Christian faith.
